with support for authoritarian leaders. In general people want more self-expression when their other needs are met, and democracy is among other things a form of self-expression. Conversely, authoritarianism thrives on fear and resentment.

Second, there is a good chance free information really does undermine authoritarianism, as long as the authoritarians can’t censor it. And uncensored AI can also bring individuals powerful tools for undermining repressive governments. Repressive governments survive by denying people a certain kind of common knowledge, keeping them from realizing that “the emperor has no clothes”. For example Srđa Popović), who helped to topple the Milošević government in Serbia, has written extensively about techniques for psychologically robbing authoritarians of their power, for breaking the spell and rallying support against a dictator. A superhumanly effective AI version of Popović (whose skills seem like they have high returns to intelligence) in everyone’s pocket, one that dictators are powerless to block or censor, could create a wind at the backs of dissidents and reformers across the world. To say it again, this will be a long and protracted fight, one where victory is not assured, but if we design and build AI in the right way, it may at least be a fight where the advocates of freedom everywhere have an advantage.

As with neuroscience and biology, we can also ask how things could be “better than normal”—not just how to avoid autocracy, but how to make democracies better than they are today. Even within democracies, injustices happen all the time. Rule-of-law societies make a promise to their citizens that everyone will be equal under the law and everyone is entitled to basic human rights, but obviously people do not always receive those rights in practice. That this promise is even partially fulfilled makes it something to be proud of, but can AI help us do better?

For example, could AI improve our legal and judicial system by making decisions and processes more impartial? Today people mostly worry in legal or judicial contexts that AI systems will be a *cause* of discrimination, and these worries are important and need to be defended against. At the same time, the vitality of democracy depends on harnessing new technologies to improve democratic institutions, not just responding to risks. A truly mature and successful implementation of AI has the potential to *reduce* bias and be fairer for everyone.

For centuries, legal systems have faced the dilemma that the law aims to be impartial, but is inherently subjective and thus must be interpreted by biased humans. Trying to make the law fully mechanical hasn’t worked because the real world is messy and can’t always be captured in mathematical formulas. Instead legal systems rely on notoriously imprecise criteria like “cruel and unusual punishment” or “utterly without redeeming social importance”, which humans then interpret—and often do so in a manner that displays bias, favoritism, or arbitrariness. “Smart contracts” in cryptocurrencies haven’t revolutionized law because ordinary code isn’t smart enough to adjudicate all that much of interest. But AI might be smart enough for this: it is the first technology capable of making broad, fuzzy judgements in a repeatable and mechanical way.