ions *feels* like it should have some serious positive applications to law and justice. At the very least, such systems could work alongside humans as an aid to decision-making. Transparency would be important in any such system, and a mature science of AI could conceivably provide it: the training process for such systems could be extensively studied, and advanced interpretability techniques could be used to see inside the final model and assess it for hidden biases, in a way that is simply not possible with humans. Such AI tools could also be used to monitor for violations of fundamental rights in a judicial or police context, making constitutions more self-enforcing.

In a similar vein, AI could be used to both aggregate opinions and drive consensus among citizens, resolving conflict, finding common ground, and seeking compromise. Some early ideas in this direction have been undertaken by the computational democracy project, including collaborations with Anthropic. A more informed and thoughtful citizenry would obviously strengthen democratic institutions.

There is also a clear opportunity for AI to be used to help provision government services—such as health benefits or social services—that are in principle available to everyone but in practice often severely lacking, and worse in some places than others. This includes health services, the DMV, taxes, social security, building code enforcement, and so on. Having a very thoughtful and informed AI whose job is to give you everything you’re legally entitled to by the government in a way you can understand—and who also helps you comply with often confusing government rules—would be a big deal. Increasing state capacity both helps to deliver on the promise of equality under the law, and strengthens respect for democratic governance. Poorly implemented services are currently a major driver of cynicism about government27.

All of these are somewhat vague ideas, and as I said at the beginning of this section, I am not nearly as confident in their feasibility as I am in the advances in biology, neuroscience, and poverty alleviation. They may be unrealistically utopian. But the important thing is to have an ambitious vision, to be willing to dream big and try things out. The vision of AI as a guarantor of liberty, individual rights, and equality under the law is too powerful a vision not to fight for. A 21st century, AI-enabled polity could be both a stronger protector of individual freedom, and a beacon of hope that helps make liberal democracy the form of government that the whole world wants to adopt.

## 5. Work and meaning

Even if everything in the preceding four sections goes well—not only do we alleviate disease, poverty, and inequality, but liberal democracy becomes the dominant form of government, and existing liberal democracies become better versions of themselves—at least one important question still remains. “It’s great we live in such a technologically advanced world as well as a fair and decent one”, someone might object, “but with AIs doing everything, how will humans have meaning? For that matter, how will they survive economically?”.

I think this question is more difficult than the others. I don’t mean that I am necessarily more pessimistic about it than I am about the other questions (although I do see challenges).