could in principle be eradicated by targeting their animal carriers, for example releasing mosquitoes infected with a bacterium that blocks their ability to carry a disease (who then infect all the other mosquitos) or simply using gene drives to wipe out the mosquitos. This requires one or a few centralized actions, rather than a coordinated campaign that must individually treat millions. Overall, I think 5-10 years is a reasonable timeline for a good fraction (maybe 50%) of AI-driven health benefits to propagate to even the poorest countries in the world. A good goal might be for the developing world 5-10 years after powerful AI to at least be substantially healthier than the developed world is today, even if it continues to lag behind the developed world. Accomplishing this will of course require a huge effort in global health, philanthropy, political advocacy, and many other efforts, which both AI developers and policymakers should help with.
* **Economic growth**. Can the developing world quickly catch up to the developed world, not just in health, but across the board economically? There is some precedent for this: in the final decades of the 20th century, several East Asian economies achieved sustained ~10% annual real GDP growth rates, allowing them to catch up with the developed world. Human economic planners made the decisions that led to this success, not by directly controlling entire economies but by pulling a few key levers (such as an industrial policy of export-led growth, and resisting the temptation to rely on natural resource wealth); it’s plausible that “AI finance ministers and central bankers” could replicate or exceed this 10% accomplishment. An important question is how to get developing world governments to adopt them while respecting the principle of self-determination—some may be enthusiastic about it, but others are likely to be skeptical. On the optimistic side, many of the health interventions in the previous bullet point are likely to organically increase economic growth: eradicating AIDS/malaria/parasitic worms would have a transformative effect on productivity, not to mention the economic benefits that some of the neuroscience interventions (such as improved mood and focus) would have in developed and developing worlds alike. Finally, non-health AI-accelerated technology (such as energy technology, transport drones, improved building materials, better logistics and distribution, and so on) may simply permeate the world naturally; for example, even cell phones quickly permeated sub-Saharan Africa via market mechanisms, without needing philanthropic efforts. On the more negative side, while AI and automation have many potential benefits, they also pose challenges for economic development, particularly for countries that haven't yet industrialized. Finding ways to ensure these countries can still develop and improve their economies in an age of increasing automation is an important challenge for economists and policymakers to address. Overall, a dream scenario—perhaps a goal to aim for—would be 20% annual GDP growth rate in the developing world, with 10% each coming from AI-enabled economic decisions and the natural spread of AI-accelerated technologies, including but not limited to health. If achieved, this would bring sub-Saharan Africa to the current per-capita GDP of China in 5-10 years, while raising much of the rest of the developing world to levels higher than the current US GDP.