 on the genuine humanitarian victories in the previous two sections. Ideally, powerful AI should help the developing world *catch up to* the developed world, even as it revolutionizes the latter.

I am not as confident that AI can address inequality and economic growth as I am that it can invent fundamental technologies, because technology has such obvious high returns to intelligence (including the ability to route around complexities and lack of data) whereas the economy involves a lot of constraints from humans, as well as a large dose of intrinsic complexity. I am somewhat skeptical that an AI could solve the famous “socialist calculation problem”23 and I don’t think governments will (or should) turn over their economic policy to such an entity, even if it could do so. There are also problems like how to convince people to take treatments that are effective but that they may be suspicious of.

The challenges facing the developing world are made even more complicated by pervasive corruption in both private and public sectors. Corruption creates a vicious cycle: it exacerbates poverty, and poverty in turn breeds more corruption. AI-driven plans for economic development need to reckon with corruption, weak institutions, and other very human challenges.

Nevertheless, I do see significant reasons for optimism. Diseases *have* been eradicated and many countries *have* gone from poor to rich, and it is clear that the decisions involved in these tasks exhibit high returns to intelligence (despite human constraints and complexity). Therefore, AI can likely do them better than they are currently being done. There may also be targeted interventions that get around the human constraints and that AI could focus on. More importantly though, *we have* to try. Both AI companies and developed world policymakers will need to do their part to ensure that the developing world is not left out; the moral imperative is too great. So in this section, I’ll continue to make the optimistic case, but keep in mind everywhere that success is not guaranteed and depends on our collective efforts.

Below I make some guesses about how I think things may go in the developing world over the 5-10 years after powerful AI is developed:

* **Distribution of health interventions**. The area where I am perhaps most optimistic is distributing health interventions throughout the world. Diseases have actually been eradicated by top-down campaigns: smallpox was fully eliminated in the 1970s, and polio and guinea worm are nearly eradicated with less than 100 cases per year. Mathematically sophisticated epidemiological modeling plays an active role in disease eradication campaigns, and it seems very likely that there is room for smarter-than-human AI systems to do a better job of it than humans are. The logistics of distribution can probably also be greatly optimized. One thing I learned as an early donor to GiveWell is that some health charities are way more effective than others; the hope is that AI-accelerated efforts would be more effective still. Additionally, some biological advances actually make the logistics of distribution much easier: for example, malaria has been difficult to eradicate because it requires treatment each time the disease is contracted; a vaccine that only needs to be administered once makes the logistics much simpler (and such vaccines for malaria are in fact currently being developed).