sible for these problems with data is intrinsic complexity: if you’ve ever seen a diagram showing the biochemistry of human metabolism, you’ll know that it’s very hard to isolate the effect of any part of this complex system, and even harder to intervene on the system in a precise or predictable way. And finally, beyond just the intrinsic time that it takes to run an experiment on humans, actual clinical trials involve a lot of bureaucracy and regulatory requirements that (in the opinion of many people, including me) add unnecessary additional time and delay progress.

Given all this, many biologists have long been skeptical of the value of AI and “big data” more generally in biology. Historically, mathematicians, computer scientists, and physicists who have applied their skills to biology over the last 30 years have been quite successful, but have not had the truly transformative impact initially hoped for. Some of the skepticism has been reduced by major and revolutionary breakthroughs like AlphaFold (which has just deservedly won its creators the Nobel Prize in Chemistry) and AlphaProteo11, but there’s still a perception that AI is (and will continue to be) useful in only a limited set of circumstances. A common formulation is “AI can do a better job analyzing your data, but it can’t produce more data or improve the quality of the data. Garbage in, garbage out”.

But I think that pessimistic perspective is thinking about AI in the wrong way. If our core hypothesis about AI progress is correct, then the right way to think of AI is not as a method of data analysis, but as a virtual biologist who performs *all* the tasks biologists do, including designing and running experiments in the real world (by controlling lab robots or simply telling humans which experiments to run – as a Principal Investigator would to their graduate students), inventing new biological methods or measurement techniques, and so on. It is by speeding up *the whole research process* that AI can truly accelerate biology. **I want to repeat this because it’s the most common misconception that comes up when I talk about AI’s ability to transform biology: I am *not* talking about AI as merely a tool to analyze data. In line with the definition of powerful AI at the beginning of this essay, I’m talking about using AI to perform, direct, and improve upon nearly everything biologists do.**

To get more specific on where I think acceleration is likely to come from, a surprisingly large fraction of the progress in biology has come from a truly tiny number of discoveries, often related to broad measurement tools or techniques that allow precise but generalized or programmable intervention in biological systems. There’s perhaps ~1 of these major discoveries per year and collectively they arguably drive >50% of progress in biology. These discoveries are so powerful precisely because they cut through intrinsic complexity and data limitations, directly increasing our understanding and control over biological processes. A few discoveries per decade have enabled both the bulk of our basic scientific understanding of biology, and have driven many of the most powerful medical treatments.

Some examples include:

* CRISPR: a technique that allows live editing of any gene in living organisms (replacement of any arbitrary gene sequence with any other arbitrary sequence).