Machines of Loving Grace

How AI Could Transform the World for the Better

October 2024

I think and talk a lot about the risks of powerful AI. The company I'm the CEO of, Anthropic, does a lot of research on how to reduce these risks. Because of this, people sometimes draw the conclusion that I'm a pessimist or "doomer" who thinks AI will be mostly bad or dangerous. I don't think that at all. In fact, one of my main reasons for focusing on risks is that they're the only thing standing between us and what I see as a fundamentally positive future. I think that most people are underestimating just how radical the upside of AI could be, just as I think most people are underestimating how bad the risks could be.

In this essay I try to sketch out what that upside might look like—what a world with powerful AI might look like if everything goes right. Of course no one can know the future with any certainty or precision, and the effects of powerful AI are likely to be even more unpredictable than past technological changes, so all of this is unavoidably going to consist of guesses. But I am aiming for at least educated and useful guesses, which capture the flavor of what will happen even if most details end up being wrong. I'm including lots of details mainly because I think a concrete vision does more to advance discussion than a highly hedged and abstract one.

First, however, I wanted to briefly explain why I and Anthropic haven't talked that much about powerful AI's upsides, and why we'll probably continue, overall, to talk a lot about risks. In particular, I've made this choice out of a desire to maximize leverage, avoid perception of propaganda, avoid grandiosity, and avoid sci-fi baggage.

Yet despite all of the concerns above, I really do think it's important to discuss what a good world with powerful AI could look like, while doing our best to avoid the above pitfalls. In fact I think it is critical to have a genuinely inspiring vision of the future, and not just a plan to fight fires. Many of the implications of powerful AI are adversarial or dangerous, but at the end of it all, there has to be something we're fighting for, some positive-sum outcome where everyone is better off, something to rally people to rise above their squabbles and confront the challenges ahead. Fear is one kind of motivator, but it's not enough: we need hope as well.

The list of positive applications of powerful AI is extremely long (and includes robotics, manufacturing, energy, and much more), but I'm going to focus on a small number of areas that seem to me to have the greatest potential to directly improve the quality of human life. The five categories I am most excited about are: one, biology and physical health. Two, neuroscience and mental health. Three, economic development and poverty. Four, peace and governance. Five, work and meaning.

My predictions are going to be radical as judged by most standards, but I mean them earnestly and sincerely. Everything I'm saying could very easily be wrong, but I've at least attempted to ground my views in a semi-analytical assessment of how much progress in various fields might speed up and what that might mean in practice. I am fortunate to have professional experience in both biology and neuroscience, and I am an informed amateur in the field of economic development, but I am sure I will get plenty of things wrong.

Basic assumptions and framework

To make this whole essay more precise and grounded, it's helpful to specify clearly what we mean by powerful AI (i.e. the threshold at which the 5-10 year clock starts counting), as well as laying out a framework for thinking about the effects of such AI once it's present.

What powerful AI (I dislike the term AGI) will look like, and when (or if) it will arrive, is a huge topic in itself. It's one I've discussed publicly and could write a completely separate essay on. Obviously, many people are skeptical that powerful AI will be built soon and some are skeptical that it will ever be built at all. I think it could come as early as 2026, though there are also ways it could take much longer. But for the purposes of this essay, I'd like to put these issues aside, assume it will come reasonably soon, and focus on what happens in the 5-10 years after that.

By powerful AI, I have in mind an AI model—likely similar to today's LLMs in form, though it might be based on a different architecture, might involve several interacting models, and might be trained differently—with the following properties: In terms of pure intelligence, it is smarter than a Nobel Prize winner across most relevant fields – biology, programming, math, engineering, writing, etc. This means it can prove unsolved mathematical theorems, write extremely good novels, write difficult codebases from scratch, etc. In addition to just being a "smart thing you talk to", it has all the "interfaces" available to a human working virtually, including text, audio, video, mouse and keyboard control, and internet access. It can engage in any actions, communications, or remote operations enabled by this interface. It does not just passively answer questions; instead, it can be given tasks that take hours, days, or weeks to complete, and then goes off and does those tasks autonomously. It does not have a physical embodiment (other than living on a computer screen), but it can control existing physical tools, robots, or laboratory equipment through a computer; in theory it could even design robots or equipment for itself to use. The resources used to train the model can be repurposed to run millions of instances of it, and the model can absorb information and generate actions at roughly 10x-100x human speed. We could summarize this as a "country of geniuses in a datacenter".

Clearly such an entity would be capable of solving very difficult problems, very fast, but it is not trivial to figure out how fast. Two "extreme" positions both seem false to me. First, you might think that the world would be instantly transformed on the scale of seconds or days ("the Singularity"), as superior intelligence builds on itself and solves every possible scientific, engineering, and operational task almost immediately. The problem with this is that there are real physical and practical limits. Intelligence may be very powerful, but it isn't magic fairy dust.

Second, and conversely, you might believe that technological progress is saturated or rate-limited by real world data or by social factors, and that better-than-human intelligence will add very little. This seems equally implausible to me—I can think of hundreds of scientific or even social problems where a large group of really smart people would drastically speed up progress, especially if they aren't limited to analysis and can make things happen in the real world.

I think the truth is likely to be some messy admixture of these two extreme pictures, something that varies by task and field and is very subtle in its details. I believe we need new frameworks to think about these details in a productive way.

Economists often talk about "factors of production": things like labor, land, and capital. The phrase "marginal returns to labor/land/capital" captures the idea that in a given situation, a given factor may or may not be the limiting one. I believe that in the AI age, we should be talking about the marginal returns to intelligence, and trying to figure out what the other factors are that are complementary to intelligence and that become limiting factors when intelligence is very high.

My guess at a list of factors that limit or are complementary to intelligence includes: Speed of the outside world, need for data, intrinsic complexity, constraints from humans, and physical laws.

There is a further distinction based on timescales. Things that are hard constraints in the short run may become more malleable to intelligence in the long run.

With the above framework in mind, I'll try to answer that question for the five areas mentioned in the introduction.

1. Biology and health

Biology is probably the area where scientific progress has the greatest potential to directly and unambiguously improve the quality of human life. In the last century some of the most ancient human afflictions have finally been vanquished, but many more still remain, and defeating them would be an enormous humanitarian accomplishment. Beyond even curing disease, biological science can in principle improve the baseline quality of human health, by extending the healthy human lifespan, increasing control and freedom over our own biological processes, and addressing everyday problems that we currently think of as immutable parts of the human condition.

In the "limiting factors" language of the previous section, the main challenges with directly applying intelligence to biology are data, the speed of the physical world, and intrinsic complexity. Human constraints also play a role at a later stage, when clinical trials are involved.

Experiments on cells, animals, and even chemical processes are limited by the speed of the physical world: many biological protocols involve culturing bacteria or other cells, or simply waiting for chemical reactions to occur, and this can sometimes take days or even weeks, with no obvious way to speed it up. Animal experiments can take months (or more) and human experiments often take years (or even decades for long-term outcome studies). Somewhat related to this, data is often lacking—not so much in quantity, but quality: there is always a dearth of clear, unambiguous data that isolates a biological effect of interest from the other 10,000 confounding things that are going on.

In part responsible for these problems with data is intrinsic complexity: if you've ever seen a diagram showing the biochemistry of human metabolism, you'll know that it's very hard to isolate the effect of any part of this complex system, and even harder to intervene on the system in a precise or predictable way.

Given all this, many biologists have long been skeptical of the value of AI and "big data" more generally in biology. Historically, mathematicians, computer scientists, and physicists who have applied their skills to biology over the last 30 years have been quite successful, but have not had the truly transformative impact initially hoped for.

But I think that pessimistic perspective is thinking about AI in the wrong way. If our core hypothesis about AI progress is correct, then the right way to think of AI is not as a method of data analysis, but as a virtual biologist who performs all the tasks biologists do, including designing and running experiments in the real world, inventing new biological methods or measurement techniques, and so on. It is by speeding up the whole research process that AI can truly accelerate biology.

To get more specific on where I think acceleration is likely to come from, a surprisingly large fraction of the progress in biology has come from a truly tiny number of discoveries, often related to broad measurement tools or techniques that allow precise but generalized or programmable intervention in biological systems. There's perhaps ~1 of these major discoveries per year and collectively they arguably drive >50% of progress in biology.

Some examples include: CRISPR, various kinds of microscopy, genome sequencing and synthesis, optogenetics, mRNA vaccines, cell therapies such as CAR-T, and conceptual insights like the germ theory of disease.

I think their rate of discovery could be increased by 10x or more if there were a lot more talented, creative researchers. Or, put another way, I think the returns to intelligence are high for these discoveries, and that everything else in biology and medicine mostly follows from them.

Thus, it's my guess that powerful AI could at least 10x the rate of these discoveries, giving us the next 50-100 years of biological progress in 5-10 years. I'll refer to this as the "compressed 21st century": the idea that after powerful AI is developed, we will in a few years make all the progress in biology and medicine that we would have made in the whole 21st century.

What could this mean in practice? Reliable prevention and treatment of nearly all natural infectious disease. Elimination of most cancer. Very effective prevention and effective cures for genetic disease. Prevention of Alzheimer's. Improved treatment of most other ailments like diabetes, obesity, heart disease, and autoimmune diseases. Biological freedom. And doubling of the human lifespan.

It is worth looking at this list and reflecting on how different the world will be if all of it is achieved 7-12 years from now. It goes without saying that it would be an unimaginable humanitarian triumph, the elimination all at once of most of the scourges that have haunted humanity for millennia.

2. Neuroscience and mental health

In the previous section I focused on physical diseases and biology in general, and didn't cover neuroscience or mental health. But neuroscience is a subdiscipline of biology and mental health is just as important as physical health. In fact, if anything, mental health affects human well-being even more directly than physical health. Hundreds of millions of people have very low quality of life due to problems like addiction, depression, schizophrenia, low-functioning autism, PTSD, psychopathy, or intellectual disabilities. Billions more struggle with everyday problems that can often be interpreted as much milder versions of one of these severe clinical disorders.

The basic framework that I laid out for biology applies equally to neuroscience. I think the rate of these advances will be similarly accelerated by AI. I expect AI to accelerate neuroscientific progress along four distinct routes: traditional molecular biology, chemistry, and genetics; fine-grained neural measurement and intervention; advanced computational neuroscience; and behavioral interventions.

I expect AI to accelerate neuroscientific progress along four distinct routes, all of which can hopefully work together to cure mental illness and improve function: Traditional molecular biology, chemistry, and genetics; fine-grained neural measurement and intervention; advanced computational neuroscience; and behavioral interventions.

It's my guess that these four routes of progress working together would, as with physical disease, be on track to lead to the cure or prevention of most mental illness in the next 100 years even if AI was not involved—and thus might reasonably be completed in 5-10 AI-accelerated years.

Most mental illness can probably be cured. Diseases like PTSD, depression, schizophrenia, addiction, and so on can be figured out and very effectively treated. Effective genetic prevention of mental illness seems possible. Everyday problems that we don't think of as clinical disease will also be solved. And human baseline experience can be much better.

In summary, AI-accelerated neuroscience is likely to vastly improve treatments for, or even cure, most mental illness as well as greatly expand cognitive and mental freedom and human cognitive and emotional abilities.

3. Economic development and poverty

An obvious question from a humanitarian perspective is: will everyone have access to these technologies? It is one thing to develop a cure for a disease, it is another thing to eradicate the disease from the world.

I am not as confident that AI can address inequality and economic growth as I am that it can invent fundamental technologies, because the economy involves a lot of constraints from humans. Nevertheless, I do see significant reasons for optimism. Diseases have been eradicated and many countries have gone from poor to rich, and it is clear that the decisions involved in these tasks exhibit high returns to intelligence.

I think 5-10 years is a reasonable timeline for a good fraction of AI-driven health benefits to propagate to even the poorest countries in the world. A good goal might be for the developing world 5-10 years after powerful AI to at least be substantially healthier than the developed world is today.

Can the developing world quickly catch up to the developed world economically? There is some precedent for this: in the final decades of the 20th century, several East Asian economies achieved sustained ~10% annual real GDP growth rates, allowing them to catch up with the developed world. Human economic planners made the decisions that led to this success; it's plausible that AI finance ministers and central bankers could replicate or exceed this accomplishment.

Overall, a dream scenario would be 20% annual GDP growth rate in the developing world. If achieved, this would bring sub-Saharan Africa to the current per-capita GDP of China in 5-10 years.

4. Peace and governance

Suppose that everything goes well: disease, poverty, and inequality are significantly reduced and the baseline of human experience is raised substantially. It does not follow that all major causes of human suffering are solved. Humans are still a threat to each other.

I see no strong reason to believe AI will preferentially or structurally advance democracy and peace. Human conflict is adversarial and AI can in principle help both the good guys and the bad guys. It's therefore up to us as individual actors to tilt things in the right direction.

On the international side, it seems very important that democracies have the upper hand on the world stage when powerful AI is created. AI-powered authoritarianism seems too terrible to contemplate, so democracies need to be able to set the terms by which powerful AI is brought into the world.

Even if all that goes well, it leaves the question of the fight between democracy and autocracy within each country. I do have some optimism that given a global environment in which democracies control the most powerful AI, then AI may actually structurally favor democracy everywhere.

There is also a clear opportunity for AI to be used to help provision government services—such as health benefits or social services—that are in principle available to everyone but in practice often severely lacking.

5. Work and meaning

Even if everything in the preceding four sections goes well—not only do we alleviate disease, poverty, and inequality, but liberal democracy becomes the dominant form of government, and existing liberal democracies become better versions of themselves—at least one important question still remains. "It's great we live in such a technologically advanced world as well as a fair and decent one", someone might object, "but with AIs doing everything, how will humans have meaning? For that matter, how will they survive economically?"

I think this question is more difficult than the others. It relates to macroscopic questions about how society is organized that tend to resolve themselves only over time.

On the question of meaning, I think it is very likely a mistake to believe that tasks you undertake are meaningless simply because an AI could do them better. Most people are not the best in the world at anything, and it doesn't seem to bother them particularly much. I think meaning comes mostly from human relationships and connection, not from economic labor.

The economic piece actually seems more difficult to me than the meaning piece. By economic I mean the possible problem that most or all humans may not be able to contribute meaningfully to a sufficiently advanced AI-driven economy.

In the short term I agree that comparative advantage will continue to keep humans relevant. However, I do think in the long run AI will become so broadly effective and so cheap that this will no longer apply. At that point our current economic setup will no longer make sense.

While that might sound crazy, the fact is that civilization has successfully navigated major economic shifts in the past: from hunting and gathering to farming, farming to feudalism, and feudalism to industrialism. I suspect that some new and stranger thing will be needed.

Taking stock

Through the varied topics above, I've tried to lay out a vision of a world that is both plausible if everything goes right with AI, and much better than the world today. I don't know if this world is realistic, and even if it is, it will not be achieved without a huge amount of effort and struggle by many brave and dedicated people.

But it is a world worth fighting for. If all of this really does happen over 5 to 10 years—the defeat of most diseases, the growth in biological and cognitive freedom, the lifting of billions of people out of poverty to share in the new technologies, a renaissance of liberal democracy and human rights—I suspect everyone watching it will be surprised by the effect it has on them.

We have the opportunity to play some small role in making it real.